---
title: "GSoC 2023: Weeks 11 and 12"
date: 2023-08-18T21:53:09+03:00
tags:
    - opensource
    - gsoc
categories:
    - GSoC2023
ShowToc: true
---

This article is a summary of all the changes made on 
[Automated Gentoo System Updater](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Google_Summer_of_Code/2023/Ideas/Automated_Gentoo_system_updater) 
project during **weeks 11 and 12** of GSoC.  

Project is hosted on GitHub (
[gentoo_update](https://github.com/Lab-Brat/gentoo_update) and 
[mobile app](https://github.com/Lab-Brat/gentoo_update_flutter)), 
blog post can be also found on 
[Gentoo Blogs](https://blogs.gentoo.org/gsoc/2023/08/07/week-910-report-automated-gentoo-system-updater/).


### Progress on Weeks 11 and 12
During last 2 weeks I've completed app UI and Firebase backend. 
Most of the work is done!  

I'm not entirely pleased with how the backend works. In Firebase, I ended up using: 
* Firestore (security rules defined [here](https://github.com/Lab-Brat/gentoo_update_flutter/blob/main/firestore.rules))
* Cloud Functions (defined [here](https://github.com/Lab-Brat/gentoo_update_flutter/tree/main/functions))
* Cloud Messaging (FCM).  

After a user authenticates using anonymous login, a token is automatically registered in Firestore. 
This token is later used by `gentoo_update` to send reports. Cloud Functions manage the token's creation. 
In fact, all database write operations are handled by Cloud Functions, with users having read-only access 
to the data they've created. Here is how to send the report via token:
```bash
export GU_TOKEN="<token ID>"
gentoo-update --send-report mobile
```

Internally, gentoo-update talks to a Cloud Function. This function checks the token, 
then saves the report in Firestore for the user to access.  

This differs from the original idea, where I didn't intend to save tokens in Firestore. 
The first plan was to have the client side listen and let Firebase route report content 
from the Gentoo system to the app. But this method often missed reports or stored them 
incorrectly, causing them to vanish from the app. To solve this, I chose to save the reports 
and tokens, but with encryption.  

I've came up with a solution to create a custom backend for the app, which users will be 
to self-host, more about in the **Challenges** section.  

Apart from the web app, I've fixed some minor issues in `gentoo-update` and pushed the 
latest ebuild version to GURU repository
([commit link](https://github.com/gentoo/guru/commit/62522296f838eec2ca2d1324cb9a436b64f4b877)).  


### Challenges
Firebase is a good way to create a backend fast, but it comes with some downsides:
* Most useful features are free
* Not everything is transparent there
* There are no self-hosting options
* Firebase doesn't have a robust rate-limiting and security features

To address above issues I've come up with a plan to create a custom backend using the 
following stack: Linux + Docker + Python/Django + MongoDB + Nginx  

Stack is relatively straightforward. Django will replace Cloud Functions as backend, 
and will do all the checks and database writes. MongoDB will replace Firestore, which is 
also a document database. And Nginx will provide additional feature for rete-limiting, 
balancing and security checks.  

MongoDB will also could be replaced with a relational database if needed, since ORM will 
be used extensively in the backend. The same goes for Nginx.  

Best part is that all of the above can be declared in a Docker Compose file, which will 
make it very easy for users to self-host.  


### Plans for Week 13 (final week 🎉)
Here is my plan for the final week of GSoC'2023:
1. Add encryption to the Firestore. I don't want any user data to be stored in plain text.
2. Improve some UI elements and add a pop-up with commands to copy/paste.
3. Publish mobile app to Playstore.
4. Write a detailed blog post on how to use the whole thing.
5. Writa a post on forums.
